Title:
Pets can boost your brain power, study says

Article Text:
Turns out having a pet companion may delay cognitive decline or memory loss according to a new study, CNN reports.

"To our knowledge, our study is the first to consider the effect of duration of pet ownership on cognitive health," Jennifer Applebaum, a sociology doctoral candidate and National Institute of Health predoctoral fellow at University of Florida, told CNN.

In addition to cats and dogs, people who cared for rabbits, birds, fish, hamsters, and reptiles benefited from a reduction in memory loss.

"Dogs were most prevalent, followed by cats,” Applebaum added.

People benefit most when they have their pet companion for more than five years. The study showed a cognitive decline of 1.2 points over six years.

"These findings provide early evidence to suggest that long-term pet ownership could be protective against cognitive decline," said Dr. Tiffany Braley, an associate professor of neurology at the University of Michigan.

Why does this happen? Well they aren’t exactly sure. Some experts believe that stress in general is bad for long term brain health.

"Prior research has also identified associations between interactions with companion animals and physiological measures of stress reduction, including reductions in cortisol levels and blood pressure, which in the long term could have an impact on cognitive health," Braley said.

There’s also a number of other ways it may help.

"Cognitive engagement, socialization, physical activity and having a sense of purpose can separately, or even more so in combination, address key modifiable risk factors for cognitive decline and Alzheimer's disease dementia," said Dr. Richard Isaacson, director of the Alzheimer's Prevention Clinic at Florida Atlantic University's Schmidt College of Medicine.

Looks like it isn't just dogs who are man's best friend.


Article Keywords:
cognitive
boost
decline
health
pets
term
power
university
stress
brain
study
companion
reduction
pet